---
layout: post
title: "Read more books"
date: 2017-11-04
categories: Reading
---

I think we should all be reading more books. Specifically more non-fiction books, about things that we are concerned about. Here are my personal observations.

<!-- more -->

We live in the information age, when any media about any topic is at your fingertips, ready for consumption. Then how do we decide what to consume? Take a moment, to see if you can recognize the following in today's media.
- focus on extremes and sensationalize. intended to hijack your attention
- focus on oversimplification, dumbed down stuff. intended to be easy to consume.

Bite sized media presented in digested form. These are dangerous values, that should be avoided.

## what reading books signals about you
- willingness to focus on an idea for a considerable amount of time.
- willingness to go in details, nuances. beyond the superficial layers, the simplistic generalizations of complex phenomenons.
- willingness to think, interpret and form your own opinions about something.

These are powerful values, that we should cultivate.

If you are serious about learning something, read a book about it. It shows dedication and intent, when you commit yourself to the process. Because at any time you can be watching tv-shows, movies, video games, but when you choose to do otherwise, it becomes valuable.

And this may not be obvious but it is about the process of reading and not the result. You can have the result, by going to sparknotes/youtube search for a book summary. There are pretty good ones that will condense a book to its very core ideas. But that's missing the point, because you haven't internalized the idea. With no time spent nourishing the thought in your mind, the summary would be lost on you. It's holds no real value, not different from any other media, because you literally just clicked a button.

Spending time with an idea is important. Repetition of an idea, settles it in your psyche. When you sleep with an idea in your head, you come up with new insights. Reflecting on what you consume, inspires personal growth.

Read books that you've wanted to read for a long time, that are recommended to you by friends or someone you follow, or an author you like.
