---
layout: post
title: "Faith and Over-Rationalization"
date: 2017-07-23
categories: Personal
---
William Zinsser in his book "On Writing" wrote, Writing is an act of deliberation. This is what I feel right now and every word is an effort to put down. It's not that I have not been writing; I have been taking notes, documenting ideas and plans. But here I take some time to put little life back on my blog.

<!-- more -->

I work for a company now (if only, as an intern), which is a brand new part of life. It is change, and change is wonderful; bringing new realizations and struggles. 

Some weeks ago, I realized I am an anxious person. Most times I stay inside my head, thinking and debating, which makes me tense and quiet in the real world. And even when I want, I struggle to get out of my head. So I researched, and found Mindful meditation. I am reading the book "Mindfulness", which mentions how mind and body are constantly influencing each other, and how fleeting thoughts can feed on bad memories to take over your mood. Understanding a problem doesn't bring you any closer to solving it, and constantly thinking about doing well at something, makes you worse at it. So I'm trying to form habits that brings this mindfulness to practice.

Which brings me to the idea of faith, and rationalization. I was born in a religious family, now I am an atheist; but faith is not about religion. Religion is but one outlet of faith. Faith, is an irrational belief in something. In computer science, there's the concept of abstraction. Abstraction hides complexity, which in a complex system, makes it easier for components to work with each other. We can view a component as a black box, not knowing how it works, but given an input we can be sure of its output.

Faith works in a similar way (I won't say exact), where it hides complexity. At its best, it stops you from worrying about things you can't control or don't understand. Some might call this blissful ignorance, but you have to realize humans are not analytical machines. A part of this realization comes from my talks with dad. He is a devote Hindu, and prays to his Gods; and we've had many bitter arguments about religion. He recently said to me (this time I was REALLY listening): "When life gets tough and there's a lot of uncertainty, you need faith in something to keep going." My dad was born in India in a lower-middle class family, worked hard and eventually sent his son to United States to study; so I believed him. He chooses to practice his faith through religion (that's how he has always known it), but as I said, religion does not need to be a precursor. (Also see the end of this blogpost)

I do think that you can't rationalize your way out of every situation. This rationalization/critical thinking is a major cause of anxiety. I did not always think like this. The idea of human as rational creatures was the truth to me. The idea that, every action has a reason, and if you can de-construct it, and understand it, you can take better decisions. But experience has taught me better. The realization that people don't really change their minds because of science and facts. And detecting your cognitive biases, doesn't mean you can get rid of them; just that they become more subtle. We are not creatures of pure reason, and our hunter-gatherer brains remain primitive. And as astonishingly our primitive brains work, believing in something can change your physiology. Placebo effect is real. And I think faith plays a big role in the philosophy of minimalism (less is more); in dealing with FOMO (fear of missing out), and anxiety (because more information and more choices, equals more anxiety).

This is my personal understanding of faith, and I won't pretend to be, in any way, correct. Therefore I am truly trying to switch the over-rationalizing part of my brain off (the one that pretends to be Sherlock). And then do what I enjoy doing; creating something (which is such an empowering experience) like this blog post :) 

P.S: These thoughts were inspired by 
- [this talk by DHH](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cx6aGMC6MjU) (creator of Ruby on Rails)
- [Mindfulness](https://www.amazon.com/Mindfulness-Eight-Week-Finding-Peace-Frantic/dp/1609618955/)
- Zen and the art of motorcycle maintenance (which I finally finished)

P.P.S: So what do I propose to have faith in (if not religion), to conquer this over-rationalization? I prepared a manifesto called "the zen of thegreyd", modeled after [the zen of python](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zen_of_Python). It is a list of values and principles I believe in, that I want to live by. Maybe someday I will publish it here. If somebody asks me what is the meaning of life, I will read the zen to him. I did not "invent" the zen overnight, but these were things I already believed in. Ultimately, what I'm trying to say is, have faith in yourself and your values.

