---
layout: post
title: "Set your goals"
date: '2019-01-09'
categories: pscyhology
---

My notes on some of the things Jordan Peterson touches on in this compilation video of this lectures: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wqEsTPaUZF0

And I finish by telling a little about my own personal struggle.

<!-- more -->

Humans have basic psychological needs. This is a goal structure for a happy human life:
- family
- friends
- career
- educational goals
- plans for time outside of work
- attention to your mental and physical health

Finding your own authentic voice. Figuring out or building the person you want to be. Want to be and not should be, and there's a difference.
So first step is specify your goals. People don't specify their goals because they don't want to define conditions of failure. So they keep themselves vague and foggy, but then they fail all the time, you just won't know you failed until you fail really badly (a mega-crisis).

Then you plan using microroutines. How your goals instantiate day-to-day, week-to-week, month-to-month. So you set a schedule. You schedule responsibility and reward both into your schedule. Responsibilities are things you have to do (to reach your goals in the long term), rewards are things you want to do (which give you happiness in the short term). If you schedule too much responsibility, you're not going to follow your schedule since it'll be stressful and you won't be happy following it. That's how you become a tyrant to yourself. You have to negotiate with yourself so that you'll want to follow that schedule. You can start with scheduling less responsibilities and keep increasing the ratio over time, because that is more productive than not being on any schedule. Not having a schedule means you did not set goals for the day, and if you don't specify your goals you don't hit them. (Pomodoro technique is a good way to schedule.)

Scheduling is a small part of planning that comes from setting your goals for your life. Goals are the stars you're aiming for, plans are your ladder and schedule is your individual rung on the ladder. If you don't have a schedule that's a symptom of not having a plan. If you don't have a plan then that's a symptom of not having a goal, which we agreed is bad.

---

The most uncomfortable question I had to ask myself was "what do I want?", because I had no idea of the answer, and I was deeply ashamed of that. Then I asked "How could I not know what I want?". It's a profound question that begs to be answered. Somehow here I was, an adult of 24 years not knowing what I wanted out of life. With the help of some psych books, I did figure out the answer. They suggested that adults who don't know what they want, were children who were never asked that question or given the opportunity to come to know what they want. That resonated with me.

Knowing yourself is a skill. It's being very aware of your emotions and thoughts. It's trying new things, and asking how you really felt and thought about them. Taking risks, and failing and trying again until you find your own authentic voice. It's knowing when you're happy, excited, angry, anxious, depressed. It's knowing what things give rise to what mood. It's knowing what you don't want. It's being compassionate with yourself, forgiving yourself after making a mistake.

So I had to peel layers of my mind, removing expectations of my parents, family, society, culture etc. Even high expectations that I had build up for myself watching my idols. These are what you think you "should" be doing. Then deep within me were these emotions waiting to be expressed, like small things that brought me joy. I discovered how much I love music, how much I love doodling, how much I love dancing. I'm discovering things from my childhood and teenage that I loved with renewed joy. I'm embracing them as part of me, part of me that got lost in expectations or in fear of expressing them. They have given me confidence to go after things I want, to say what's on my mind. I used to fear about people's opinion of me which made me a nodder, yes-man, a people-pleaser. But now I'm much more fearful of me not fully expressing myself. Because that's living an inauthentic life. So I am bit by bit figuring out what I want, starting with the small stuff. I don't have the big picture yet, but I truly believe this practice of being in sync with your inner self, and speaking your truth is going to lead me to it.